♪
Previously on
Star Trek: Discovery...
L'AK:
That's my uncle.
Breen Primarch
of the sixth flight.
Erigah.
[grunts]
- Wait, why didn't you kill him?
- He raised me.
You want to hate me, fine.
I will not let anything
happen to Michael or you.
Why me?
Because you are just about
the only family I've got left.
Do you even know
what you're after?
Power beyond all comprehension.
If the Breen got ahold of that
power, it would be catastrophic.
We'll be long gone by then.
Hey, the Federation
can help you.
- Can they erase an Erigah?
- Moll!
You do not have
another play here.
[grunts]
This wasn't supposed to happen.
System shows
it's a Terran warp pod.
Two life signs,
sickbay equipment.
It's got to be
a life-support system.
It's Moll and L'ak.
BURNHAM:
Commander, can you grab them?
RAYNER [over comms]:
Damn it. Too late.
BURNHAM:
What are these?
They're numbers
in ancient Halem'nese.
One for each of the five towers.
The vial had the same marks,
so the clue's in tower five.
It had a metal card attached
with some kind of
Betazoid text inscription.
Stamets is analyzing it
so we can see where to go next.
CHRISTOPHER [over comms]:
Excuse me, Captain?
We just got a message
from Fed HQ.
The USS Locherer
just found Moll and L'ak.
Admiral Vance requests that
we jump to their location
immediately.
MOLL:
Special offer, courier services,
limited time only.
[echoing]: Special offer,
courier services,
limited time only.
Special offer, courier services,
NHAN:
It was broadcasting
from the pod on a loop.
Subspace frequency
Epsilon Nineteen.
BURNHAM:
That is a courier channel.
"Special offer"
is code for S.O.S.
So she was hoping
a courier would rescue them.
Luckily we got to them first.
Admiral Vance asked me to bring
a team aboard Discovery
to assist
- with security as you
transfer them to Fed HQ.
- All right.
Glad to have you
with us, Commander.
Good to be back.
Moll had this stashed on her
when we pulled her out.
Dr. Vellek's diary. We already
have some of it on file,
but let's get started
translating the rest.
It'll tell us everything
we need to know
about the Progenitors' tech.
There's a Romulan on our team.
...secure area.
It is off-limits.
Hey, come on.
Hands off the jacket.
Book. [sighs] You are...
not supposed to be here.
Yeah, uh, I heard Moll and L'ak
are beaming over.
Access is restricted.
No one in or out
without the admiral's okay.
They may know things
we don't about the clue trail
or what we'll find
at the end of it.
I've spent more time
with Moll than anyone, so maybe
I can get her to talk.
Report said she nearly
killed you on the Enterprise.
But she didn't.
So, lots of trust there.
- At least let me try.
- NHAN: Last time I saw you--
also a personal situation--
you fired on Discovery
with photon torpedoes
and set off an isolytic weapon.
And I've been working
to make things right ever since.
NHAN:
That doesn't mean
- you're not a security risk.
- Look, Commander,
Book has been instrumental
in this mission so far.
[sighs]
If we need help during
our debrief, I'll find you.
He's a good man,
and I do trust him.
I know what he means to you.
That's why I went easy on him.
I'll be right back.
CULBER:
We're almost ready, Captain.
Beaming right into a biobed,
not a good sign.
Well, L'ak is in bad shape.
It's a miracle
he's even still alive.
- And Moll?
- The Locherer reports she's
dehydrated, half starved,
but still kicking.
Literally. When we tried
to separate them,
she went ballistic.
I'm not surprised.
We're modifying the containment
field to hold them together.
Keeping them apart would only
put more stress on his system.
Okay.
Let's do this.
Captain Burnham
to the USS Locherer.
Ready for transfer.
MALE [over comms]:
Transporting now, Captain.
[grunts, gasps]
What are you doing?
I'm giving him something
for the pain,
and then I need to examine him.
We're gonna help him, Moll.
You did this to him.
- Fierce as a sa-te kru.
- Keep both eyes open.
- You know I will.
- [L'ak grunts]
Guards, step back.
[labored breathing]
[grunts]
A word, Captain?
L'ak is fading.
Some kind of vital organ
must have been hit, but
we don't know enough
about Breen physiology
to do much
besides ease his pain.
We have to do more.
Breen fugitive dying
in Federation custody,
this is politically charged,
to say the least.
Tell me you have a plan.
I did a deep dive into Dominion
War-era medical research.
There is some evidence
that the Breen
are capable
of somatic cell regeneration
in extreme cold, so we located
a captured Breen
refrigeration unit
in an old Fed HQ
storage manifest,
and we may be able to use it
to convert a biobed
into a low-temperature ICU unit.
- It's a long shot.
- Do it.
I'll alert headquarters
to have it ready right now.
BURNHAM:
Commander Asha,
bring us in for docking.
ASHA:
I'm sorry, Captain,
they're asking us to hold.
BURNHAM:
Wonder why.
Captain, we're receiving
a hail from Admiral Vance.
He's requesting to speak
with you before we dock.
Put him through.
Apparently, it's classified.
I'll meet him
in my ready room. Rayner,
you have the conn.
BURNHAM:
Admiral.
I'm having the refrigeration
unit beamed over.
Moll and L'ak
will remain in your custody.
I thought we were transferring
them to you?
Change of plans.
Once you receive it,
I need you to jump immediately.
Get them as far away as you can.
Sir, what's happening?
- We received this.
- [electronic garble]
Breen.
We ran it through translation.
RUHN:
Your Federation has captured
two fugitives
who have incurred an Erigah.
Be ready to hand them over
upon our imminent arrival.
Scans show a Breen dreadnaught
heading this way
at maximum warp.
President Rillak is at
a diplomatic summit
on Tellar Prime.
For her security,
she'll remain there.
All nonessential personnel
will shelter in quarters.
How did the Breen even know
we have them?
They must have intercepted
our communication
with the Locherer.
Goes without saying that handing
them over is not an option.
Can't allow the Breen
to become aware
of the Progenitors' technology.
So we jump away with Moll
and L'ak, and then what?
You just deny
the Federation has them?
By all means, Captain,
speak freely.
Apologies, Admiral.
To your point, the Breen
are too smart for games,
but having
Moll and L'ak elsewhere
will at least limit
the immediate risk
and force them
to consider how far
they're willing to push us
in order to fulfill this Erigah.
Well, with all due respect, sir,
we can't keep moving
indefinitely.
They will figure it out
eventually.
They'll start tracking
our jump signature.
They'll leave who knows
what kind of carnage
in their wake as they follow us
and keep following us.
Do you have
an alternative proposal?
Yeah, let Discovery stay.
Force them
to deal with us right now
and find a solution.
It'll come to that
eventually, anyway.
Fair enough.
All right, Discovery stays,
but Moll and L'ak will remain
on board, just in case.
Let's hope this works.
♪
[original Star Trek theme
plays]
T'RINA:
Admiral, Captain, Commander,
thank you for coming so quickly.
President Rillak has delegated
me to lead negotiations
in her stead.
In preparation, I have reviewed
all records of past
diplomatic relations
with the Breen.
- Anything that can help us?
- T'RINA: There has been
no official contact
since before the Burn,
so recent intelligence
is limited.
We do know they have
experienced unrest
since the death
of their emperor.
Six primarchs
are currently at war
for control of the Imperium.
Do we know which one is coming?
- We do not.
- RAYNER: Doesn't matter.
All the Breen are the same.
The word "diplomacy"
is not even in their vocabulary.
Then we shall teach it to them.
That's more a pipe dream
than a tactic.
T'RINA:
Do not equate a desire
for understanding
with lack of nerve.
This faction seeks power.
There must be something
we can offer
that they will perceive
as beneficial enough
to negate an Erigah.
An Erigah is a blood bounty.
If they need to start a war
to fulfill it, they will.
Let's not forget what happened
the last time
Breen entered Federation space.
Starfleet was caught
flat-footed.
That's not gonna happen
this time.
I've called back some
of our ships as a deterrent,
we'll mount a defense,
if need be.
We just need to keep things calm
until backup arrives.
Something doesn't add up here.
They don't need to come
into Federation territory
to make this demand.
It's a risk for them, too.
Would they really do it
just to fulfill an Erigah?
You believe there is another
reason they want Moll and L'ak?
I think there could be.
As you've said before,
the most powerful weapon
in diplomacy is information.
We need more.
Captain Saru is currently
on a diplomatic mission
not far from Breen space.
In a recent report,
he noted that
their factional wars
stem from a succession dispute.
Competing claims from disparate
branches of the royal bloodline.
A primarch of the royal line
wouldn't need L'ak
for succession,
so what purpose would
he and Moll serve, then?
It doesn't matter.
None of it will matter
if they think they can take us.
My suggestion: We install
thoron emitters on the hull.
Used with duranium shadows,
it'll give the impression
that we're armed to the gills.
At least give them pause.
Or incite them to attack.
[scoffs, chuckles]
So, what--
we should just stick our necks
out on the chopping block?
- Commander Rayner,
we're on the same team here.
- Yeah?
Am I the only one familiar
with the Romulan saying,
"Never turn your back
on a Breen"?
There is nothing to be gained
from xenophobic comments.
I'm not the xenophobic one,
Madam President.
To the Breen,
genocide is a necessity.
Their version
of a Prime Directive.
Commander, wait for me outside.
[scoffs]
[sighs]
Madam President, Admiral,
if Moll and L'ak
have information
that might be helpful,
we have to get it out of them
sooner rather than later.
I was with them on the ISS.
I got a sense
of how they operate.
I think I have a shot.
Then you better take it.
Thank you.
Captain.
Make sure to keep
your Number One in line.
Can't afford any missteps
when the Breen get here.
Understood.
Madam President.
If Vance thinks
a defensive position
is anything short of an
invitation to be decimated...
Well, the admiral is doing the
best he can with what he has.
And he's as concerned as I am
about your ability
to handle this today.
Neither of you understand
what you're up against here.
But I suspect you do.
This seems personal, Rayner.
But if you have valuable intel,
you need to share it.
I already said
what I had to say.
I apologize
for the tone, Captain.
[indistinct announcement
over P.A.]
Dismissed.
Lieutenant Gallo,
place us on Yellow Alert.
All hands prepare for the
imminent arrival of the Breen.
- STAMETS: Hey, Tilly.
- Huh?
Wait, Tilly.
I-I was looking for you
at the science lab
and they said you were taking
a-a shuttle
to Fed HQ?
Yeah, if the Breen
are gonna attack,
my cadets are gonna need me.
We need you here.
Look, um,
this was attached to the clue
we retrieved
from the fifth tower
on Halem'no.
It's a Betazed logo,
and the text translates to
"the labyrinths of the mind."
So, if you and Adira could focus
on the meaning of that phrase,
then I can figure out
the properties of the metal.
Paul, why are we talking
about the clue right now?
The last time the Breen
paid a visit to the Federation,
they destroyed an entire city.
Which is exactly why we need
to keep focusing on this.
Look, the Mitchell is out there,
and their orders
are to stand by in case...
Well, in case they receive
an encrypted message from us.
You mean, in case we can't
compete the mission
because we're all dead.
This clue
is the most important thing
in the Federation right now.
We have to get the Progenitors'
power and keep it safe.
If the Breen
or-or someone else gets it...
And, honestly,
Fed HQ is the safest place
your cadets could be right now.
So...
can I let Adira know
you're on your way to help?
Yes.
Of course.
Dr. Culber, how's he doing?
Improving, slowly.
The blend of
sub-zero gasses promotes
a strong immune response
unique to the Breen.
Can I talk to him?
You can try.
The Breen are on their way.
They demand that
we hand you both over.
You must have foreseen
the possibility they would
intercept your SOS.
What was your plan?
Always been partial
to winging it.
On the ISS,
you said you were trying
to buy your way out
of the Erigah with
the Progenitors' power.
Is there anything else
they would accept as payment?
If there was,
we would have paid it.
A dreadnaught-- the most
powerful warship class
in the entire Breen Imperium--
is coming all the way
to Federation Headquarters
for your Erigah.
This primarch
really wants you. Why?
We could have let you die
out there.
Instead, we're risking our lives
to help you.
If you want to help us,
let us out of here.
Take our chances on our own.
With him in his condition?
You would have no chance.
Some things
are worse than death.
What's worse than death?
This conversation, for starters.
Primarch doesn't actually
plan to kill you, does he?
Who are you?
His child?
Sibling? Cousin?
What does he really want
with you?
Fine, I'll tell you
what he wants. The throne.
I'm guessing, somehow,
you can get it for him,
if he can have you
under his thumb again.
And for someone who fought
for their freedom
that would be worse
than death, wouldn't it?
Oh, it's you, isn't it?
You are the bloodline,
not the primarch.
He can't succeed without you.
Yeah.
Lucky me.
Direct descendent
of the emperor.
The scion of the Breen Imperium.
Makes me sick to even say it.
So do me a favor.
When my uncle gets here...
...spit in his face for me.
ZORA:
I've found a match
for the phrase inscribed
upon the metal card.
Labyrinths of the Mind is the
title of a Betazoid manuscript,
written in 2371
by a Dr. Marina Derex.
That's one of the scientists
who helped hide
the Progenitors' tech.
Uh, any chance
you can source us a copy?
Only a few thousand
were published in its time.
I don't see that
any remain available.
I'm sorry,
there has to be one somewhere.
Looking more closely, I don't
believe a copy will be helpful.
The punctuation
of the Betazed symbols
point to this being
the root text.
That is, the original
handwritten manuscript.
TILLY:
The original manuscript?
Well, any chance
that still exists?
If it does,
I have no record of it.
Fantastic.
For a second there,
I thought we had a gimmie.
Uh, Zora, could you do a scan
of Starfleet personnel files
to see if there's anyone
with expertise
- on ancient manuscripts?
- Oh, that's a good idea.
Of course, Ensign. One moment.
- [chuckles]: What?
- Nothing, just...
Remember how scared you were to
be on the bridge when we went to
Halem'no? You did a great job.
I don't know about that.
[chuckles]
No, you did.
And you're doing
a great job with this.
You're just...
helping us find the clue.
Just seems like, in general,
you're really finding your way,
and you shouldn't be afraid
to take on more, you know?
You have it in you.
- Well, thanks, Teach.
- [computer chimes]
I have found someone
with relevant experience.
Her curriculum vitae
lists prior employment
as a rare and
antiquarian bookseller.
Uh, who?
Commander Reno.
TILLY:
Uh, Commander Reno, uh,
we could use your help.
If you can talk while I work.
This targeting matrix is screwy.
Got to have accurate weapons
if we start shooting it out
with the Breen.
Everyone seems to think
that's inevitable.
It's the whole
faceless-helmet vibe.
Truncheons. Jackboots.
Where's the nuance?
Yeah, so we're working on
the latest clue. Uh,
it points to a rare manuscript.
We were thinking since you
used to work with those, um...
Uh... I may have padded
my résumé with that one.
Truth is, I used to move
hard-to-find folios for
a shady antiquarian archivist.
Try saying that one
five times fast.
Uh, sorry, you were a smuggler?
I smuggled.
Had a lot of odd jobs
before I committed to Starfleet.
VIP shuttle pilot,
deep mercury welder, bartender
at a cozy little dive
on Ashalon Four.
I'm actually supposed to pick up
a guest shift tonight
at Red's Lounge.
You haven't lived
until you've tried
my Seven of Limes.
Wow, you really got around.
Uh, not... I'm sor...
Not like that.
Oh, yeah, like that.
All right, well,
story for another time. Um...
we are looking for
a very specific manuscript.
It is a handwritten
Betazoid text
called Labyrinths of the Mind.
RENO:
Never heard of it.
There's a lot of places
something like that
could end up.
Private collections, museums,
in a landfill.
We can't hit a dead end here.
Once we figure this out,
it'll take us to the final clue.
No, no, we'll figure it out.
Walk with me.
I've got shield emitters
to overhaul before the Breen...
CHRISTOPHER [on P.A.]:
Attention all personnel.
We are code one-alpha.
Code one-alpha.
Shit, they're here.
[booming]
FEMALE [over P.A.]:
Attention all personnel.
We are now at Yellow Alert.
- Repeat: we are at Yellow Alert.
- Madam President. Admiral.
That Breen ship--
that's the same ship that we saw
on the time-bug cycle.
The one that destroyed
Federation Headquarters.
VANCE:
What are the scans telling us?
Scans can't penetrate
their shields, Admiral.
Hail them.
I do hope some
actionable intelligence
- came from your visit with L'ak?
- BURNHAM: Yes.
Without him, this primarch
has no claim to the throne.
We just need time
to figure out how to use
that information to get them
to leave, peacefully.
TEEMO:
They've answered our hail, sir.
[electronic garbling]
Translating.
I am Primarch Ruhn.
I demand you transfer
the fugitives to my ship.
President T'Rina of Ni'Var.
I've been empowered
by Federation President Rillak
to greet you
and lead this negotiation.
There will be no negotiation.
The fugitives. Immediately.
L'ak and Moll are currently
receiving medical treatment,
and any extradition orders
would need to be drafted
and approved.
Four hours should suffice.
RUHN:
One hour.
Failure to comply will be
considered an act of war.
Extradition orders?
It seemed preferable to claims
of a tribble infestation.
You said you needed time
to figure out how to use what
you learned
from L'ak and Moll in order
to resolve this peacefully.
You have one hour.
Thank you.
I do have an idea.
Okay, Zora, um,
eliminate star systems
that aren't rich
in ionized beryllium
or gadolinium-154.
Actually, no, um,
try removing all systems
that contain alloys,
minerals or compounds
that are not detected
in the Betazoid card.
ZORA:
Here you are, Commander.
- So much for my shortcut.
- Hey. There you are.
I was looking for you earlier.
They said that you were
with Tilly, but to check back.
Yeah, w-we're dividing
and conquering with the clue.
Uh, I'm working on
where the card came from
and Tilly and Adira
are figuring out the phrase.
- Uh, what do you need?
- I want to help.
Put me to work.
- Really?
- Yeah.
You could ask Hugh--
I'm shite at sitting around.
So, until someone needs me
to pick up a phaser
and take on some Breen,
I'm all yours.
Okay, great. Well, n-not
the "taking on Breen" part.
Hopefully, it won't
come to that, but, um,
you can help find anything
that will point us
toward where in space
this was made.
Okay, so I take it these are our
possible origin points?
Yeah, well, um,
there used to be more of them.
A needle in a haystack, then.
Try a needle
in a hundred million haystacks.
Okay. Let's start looking.
Commander.
I was strategizing.
We're running out of time.
What do you know
about Breen leadership?
Succession, specifically.
Not much. Why?
We know that the primarch
needs L'ak to claim the throne.
I think we can use that.
I'm just not sure how.
We're dealing with
a culture that we know
nearly nothing about.
Rayner, you do.
You had a strong
reaction earlier,
and I... I didn't
fully understand it,
but then I did a little digging
and learned
that Kellerun was used
as a Breen outpost
for a number of years.
Your home.
That was a long time ago.
I don't...
It's not something
I like to talk about.
Can you at least tell me
if you had any run-ins
with a Primarch Ruhn?
No.
Another primarch
controlled our planet.
Tahal.
Showed up.
No warning.
Ships filled the sky
like a swarm of Golor beetles.
Chose it as a forward base.
Used it as a munitions
resupply hub.
Tahal clear-cut our forests,
poisoned our seas,
blackened our skies.
I don't even know how many died.
Collateral damage in whatever
war she was fighting.
We put up a hell of a fight.
But I'm the only one
of my family that made it.
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
Breen cannot be negotiated with.
Not when they want something.
BURNHAM:
We just need to get Ruhn
to believe
we can offer him something
he wants more
than Moll and L'ak.
And I think you just
gave us a way.
Thank you for talking.
[sighs]
RENO:
I used to have
tons of contacts
in the book trade.
800 years ago, anyway.
They're all
pushing up daisies now.
Got anything else that might
help narrow things down?
Uh, manuscript's one of a kind.
Any copies would have been lost
a long time ago
and the original might be
all that we have left,
like, anywhere.
Are you sure
it's a one of a kind?
- Uh, as far as we know. Why?
- RENO: Dr. Derex
would have wanted to protect it
if it leads to the next clue.
Try the Eternal Gallery
and Archive.
A mouthful, I know.
We just called it the archive.
It's like a bank
but it protects knowledge.
Neutral, all worlds welcome,
that sort of thing.
Lots of rarities go there
- for safekeeping.
- Yeah, we'll check it out.
Where is it?
In space. Somewhere.
Stays safe
by always being on the move.
Did you say the title was
engraved on a piece of metal?
Yeah. Does that mean something?
Well, might be the library card.
That's how they granted access.
Sounds like something
out of a holodeck adventure
for the littles, right?
The archive.
We're on it. Thank you.
- Good luck.
- Back at you.
Good news: You're not
out of the woods,
but you are stable.
Well, your captain thinks
she can play Ruhn,
but it's a mistake to assume
Breen think like humans do.
We're nothing like you.
Not even close.
Well, I believe,
however different we are,
there's always common ground.
You found that with Moll.
L'AK:
Moll loves me
because of our differences,
not despite them.
I didn't even think
that was possible.
You're straining yourself.
Are you done prodding him?
He needs to rest.
We cannot let your uncle get us,
not before
we have the Progenitors' tech
to bargain with.
The Federation
will never give us up.
Stuck in a brig is just
another kind of stuck.
You need to make a run for it.
I'm not leaving you.
I'll get the docs to lower
the containment field.
You go steal a shuttle,
beam me on board, we'll fly
the hell away from here.
Just like that?
You have a better idea?
What's your plan for the field?
[sighs]
Let's just say...
you're not gonna like it.
I love you.
I love you, too, green eye.
♪
Are we ready?
As we planned, then.
Hail the Breen ship.
Tell them we're prepared
to hand over the fugitives.
Hailing now, Admiral.
Welcome aboard, Primarch.
I'm Admiral Vance.
You've already met
President T'Rina.
[electronic garbling]
The primarch demands:
Where are his prisoners?
As the hour given
is not yet finished,
we would like to use
what little time remains
as an opportunity
for conversation.
[speaking Breen]
The primarch declares:
He has no need for conversation.
He wants what is his.
No, what he said was he has
"no need to speak
with spineless,
insignificant achworms."
A more accurate
translation, yes?
Hear our offer.
45 metric tons of raw dilithium
in trade for lifting the Erigah.
I will speak in your tongue
so there can be
no misunderstanding.
The only payment
for a blood bounty is blood.
How much is spilled today
will be up to you.
We would prefer
to avoid conflict.
Therefore, we will offer you
one final chance
to consider our request.
You?
Offer me?
It is an insult.
We tried to engage
in diplomatic negotiations
and have been refused, rebuffed
and now ridiculed.
So we must make
a difficult decision.
Instead of delivering
the prisoners to you,
we will accept an offer we have
received from Primarch Tahal.
Tahal?
Captain Burnham and Commander
Rayner have been the leads
on negotiations with her.
She has also taken interest
in L'ak.
Having him by her side
would greatly bolster
her claim to the throne.
Which is also the hope for you.
This was never about an Erigah.
It's about power.
[whirring]
You lie.
Tahal would rather gnaw
her own flesh
than strike a deal
with the Federation.
She was fierce
in her negotiations
but fair in her terms.
This bluff
wouldn't fool a hatchling.
I know Tahal well.
I know she named her flagship
the Tau Ceti,
after a lethal viper
with a slow-acting venom.
Her favored way of killing
her enemies, when she wants
to watch them die by degree.
That's how she took my kinfolk
on Kellerun
when they rose against her
at the Twin Gates.
Would have
killed me, too, but...
she said
she liked the way I fought.
Ferocious, relentless,
"almost like a Breen"
is how she put it.
Do you still think
we're bluffing, Primarch?
Bring me L'ak.
Or I will blast this station
into atoms.
You would not, in fact,
take such action
for fear it might harm him.
A risk we know
you cannot afford.
♪
Hey, Starfleet.
I need to talk
to Captain Burnham.
GUARD:
Commander Nhan
will return momentarily.
MOLL:
Not her.
Burnham.
Okay. What's the problem here?
MOLL:
I already told him-- I want
to talk to Captain Burnham.
[screaming]
- Lower the field.
- [L'ak groaning]
That's an entire day's dose.
You did this to yourself?
Moll, go. Go!
[groaning]
- [hissing]
- [alarm beeping]
- [grunts]
- [groans]
[grunts]
- Let her go.
- I'm trying to help you both.
[whirring]
[grunting]
[groans]
- [groans]
- Damn it, Moll, stop!
[grunting]
- [groaning]
- [cracking]
[grunting]
[groans]
MOLL:
I'll be back as soon as I can.
Drop your weapon!
[grunting]
[grunts]
[panting]
[L'ak panting, groaning]
- [grunts]
- [shouts]
[speaking Breen]
Whatever the terms
of your agreement with Tahal,
we will exceed it.
L'ak must come to me.
We have no desire
to engage in a bidding war
between your factions.
There is a third option.
We reject Tahal's offer.
You leave here in peace.
We keep the prisoners.
And why would I accept that?
Because we have a spore drive.
And if you attack us,
we can be gone
with L'ak to Tahal in seconds.
But if we keep him,
the Scion is off the table
and the status quo
is maintained.
You can settle your dispute with
Tahal the way you always have,
in battle.
Unless you fear
you cannot defeat her.
♪
If any harm befalls the Scion
at the hands of the Federation,
war will be unavoidable.
It is my sworn duty.
We give you our word
that he will not be harmed
while in our custody.
NHAN [over comms]:
Captain Burnham.
It's Nhan.
♪
- Nhan?
- Moll got out.
- I'm going after her.
- BURNHAM: Zora,
- can you locate her?
- ZORA: There is no sign
of her biometric data, Captain.
Hang in there, L'ak.
Stay with me.
How is that possible?
We took all her gear from her
when we captured her.
ZORA: She may have
some implanted form
of biometric cloaking
technology.
Damn it.
Initiate lockdown protocol
and see what you can do
to help me find her.
Respectfully, Captain,
my detail, my prisoner.
Go.
- Hugh?
- [sighs] We're losing him.
- Not an option.
- We don't know enough
about his physiology.
- [L'ak groaning]
- We need a Breen medic.
I'll get you one.
How?
The primarch.
[chime]
ZORA:
Attention, crew,
all decks have been sealed
under lockdown protocol.
Repeat: We are
on lockdown protocol.
Zora, what's happening?
ZORA: One of
the fugitives escaped sickbay.
Commander Nhan's team
is conducting a search.
It's Moll. Damn it.
Wait, Book,
we already have a mission.
Have any terminals been used
to access ship schematics?
ZORA: There was a log-in
30 seconds ago.
- Where?
- ZORA: Terminal C-7
on Deck 5.
I need to go.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no. No.
- No, Nhan's after her.
- Nhan doesn't know Moll.
- We have to solve this.
- I can help.
Book, the mission
has to be the priority.
We need that final clue.
Okay.
The scientist was Betazoid,
but the clue has
no trace elements from Betazed.
What about from one
of their colonies?
They didn't have any
800 years ago.
We must be missing something.
It feels like
we should be further along.
Yeah. Yeah.
You would think so.
What did you just say?
Oh, um...
- we must be missing something.
- No, you said
something about-about feeling.
That's it.
[stammers]
Betazoids are telepaths.
So what if Dr. Derex
created a transitive link
between this card and the place
it came from? And...
and she would have left traces
of her thoughts
and emotions behind.
And you're an empath.
So maybe you could read them.
[sighs]
Anything?
Not with you talking,
there won't be.
♪
You were right.
I see something.
Empty space.
Somewhere remote.
Any cosmological details?
Um, planets?
Suns? Nebulae?
A dust cloud.
Huge.
A storm.
Not a dust storm.
Plasma.
Plasma storm. All right.
And there's a noise,
like an explosion.
Plasma blast.
Maybe a few.
Huge, remote plasma storm.
Possible explosive
plasma bursts,
which would create
ionic discharge.
That's good.
That's-that's helpful.
Okay.
Uh, any-anything else?
Uh...
Yeah. Another feeling.
[stammers]
Eternity.
Eternal.
Don't know what it means.
I have to go.
- [rapid beeping]
- O2 saturation levels
are still dropping.
- Try boosting through...
- I got your Breen medic.
He'll be beaming in any minute.
The primarch will be joining us.
It was the only way
he would agree.
MALE:
Captain, they're beaming in now.
Step away from him.
[beeping continues]
Where's the second prisoner?
She's being held elsewhere
on the ship.
If my nephew dies here,
the Federation will pay.
[L'ak groaning softly]
- Go around back.
- Copy.
- [whirring]
- Thank you for alerting me.
I may have misjudged you.
Making things right
is a process.
And L'ak?
Did he get out, too?
He pulled a risky move and...
Moll, lower your weapon!
Ship's locked down!
There's nowhere to go!
ENGINEER:
She's got a map
- to shuttle bay!
- Shut up!
What you did back in sickbay
to get out
backfired.
L'ak misjudged the dose.
He may not make it.
MOLL:
Yeah, nice try.
Sell me a goat farm on Bopak III
while you're at it.
Let me try.
[exhales]
Moll?
Hey, it's Book.
Look, I'm coming out.
[whirring]
Not another step.
She isn't lying.
L'ak is your world.
I know that.
I also know what
it's like to lose one.
Don't miss your chance
to be there with him.
For him.
♪
[monitor beeping steadily]
I'm here.
L'AK:
Moll.
I'm sorry.
I guess I used too much.
[shudders]
Don't go.
I need you with me.
L'AK:
It's okay.
You'll be okay.
I promise.
No.
This isn't how our story ends.
This isn't how
our story ends.
[monitor flatlining]
[crying]
RUHN:
You killed the Scion.
BURNHAM:
No, no, he did this to himself.
CULBER: He hacked a biobed
and injected himself
with a massive
dose of tricordrazine.
RUHN: Intention is nothing.
Outcome is everything.
Prepare for battle.
T'RINA:
L'ak is dead.
Ruhn has ordered the troops
back to their ship,
and all torpedo systems
to be armed.
Everybody, just take it easy.
[speaks Breen]
Red alert. Shields up.
If anyone's gonna make a move,
I strongly suggest
we be the first.
What we do here,
Admiral, will make waves
that may strike many worlds.
You want to survive long
enough to see that happen?
- Because at this rate...
- Commander!
- TEEMO: Admiral.
Four warp signatures
are arriving. They're Starfleet.
Not a moment too soon.
BURNHAM:
The Federation
brought him here to save him.
We would have no reason
to wish him any harm.
He overdosed on a stimulant.
Part of a plan to escape.
- Those lies will be
your last words.
- Wait.
It's true.
He did it for us,
so we could be free.
Your words are not proof.
You think a war to avenge him
will unite the Breen behind you?
If I cannot use
the Scion in life,
I will use him in death.
Yeah, well,
I go where L'ak goes.
Even in death.
This is the privilege
of our joining.
- An abomination.
- No, a marriage.
Which means you are
obligated to take me with you.
- Moll, what are you doing?
- I'm not talking to you.
You will never
be welcome among us.
MOLL:
Maybe this will help.
The Federation's
hiding something from you.
A power so great
you won't need L'ak
to claim the throne.
No one will stand in your way.
And I can get it for you
if you take me with you.
If you wish to avoid war,
she is my price.
She is under our protection.
I will allow you five minutes
to transport her to my ship.
BOOK:
She's not thinking straight.
BURNHAM:
Or she is, and she has a plan.
T'RINA: Her motives
are irrelevant at this moment.
I have a decision to make
on behalf of the Federation.
That is where our attention
should be.
[distorted voices echoing]
Okay, risk analysis.
Does Moll know any details
about the Progenitors'
technology that she
hasn't yet told the Breen?
Nhan's team translated
the rest of the diary.
Nothing of substance,
but there is a passage
that may be pertinent.
Dr. Vellek believed
that since the technology
could be used to create life,
it might also be used
to revive the dead.
- Bit of a stretch.
- BURNHAM: Doesn't matter.
What matters is that she thinks
it'll bring L'ak back.
That's why she's doing this.
RAYNER:
Why would she go with the Breen?
They have an Erigah on her head.
Moll told us they'd use
the technology to pay for it.
So by helping the Breen,
she gets L'ak and their freedom
at the same time.
Ruhn will kill her the second
he has this technology.
Maybe she has
a plan for that, too.
Are there further considerations
from a strategic perspective?
She doesn't have the clue
from Halem'no. We do.
Once it's decoded,
we can jump immediately.
They can track our signature,
but speed is on our side.
You can't actually be
considering this.
We can't give her to them.
VANCE:
We are now in a race
with the Breen,
whether they hold her
in their custody or not.
Well, shouldn't she be tried
for what happened on Q'Mau?
She also committed crimes
in Breen space
and will be held accountable
or not according to their laws.
Unfortunately, it seems
there is little to be lost
by allowing this,
and much to be lost
by keeping her.
This is wrong, Michael.
STAMETS:
We figured it out.
The next clue is in a place
called The Eternal Gallery
and Archive.
It changes location
about every 50 years.
We found records for
18 different locations
over the past 900 years or so.
And each of those records
mentioned
a metal "library card,"
which is used to gain access
to a specific item
stored in there, so...
- So where's the Archive now?
- STAMETS: Well, thanks to Book,
we know that it's in a region
that has
a lot of ionic discharge
in close proximity.
Every second counts.
We don't have time
- to search all that.
- ADIRA: We don't have to.
Zora, can you please show us
all the archive's
known previous locations?
And can you overlay
the datasets?
ZORA:
Of course, Ensign.
TILLY: The Archive has been
on a path moving through space
over centuries,
so tracing the prior locations,
we land on a match here.
This is where it is now.
- The Badlands.
- Been there.
- It's as fun as it sounds.
- Then we won't stay long.
We'll get in quick,
and get out even quicker.
Really good work, team.
Thank you. Prepare to jump.
Let's go get our last clue.
BURNHAM:
Commander.
Today must have been
really difficult.
Hell, I mutinied rather
than giving an inch back
to the Klingons.
A lot of good that did you.
Yeah.
You did really well today.
What they did to
my planet, though...
never gonna happen again.
We'll make sure of it.
Status report.
Comms channels are open,
Captain.
Spore-drive system
is in jump configuration.
Shields and scanning systems
are nominal.
Science is standing by
for location analysis.
Commander Asha, there's
gonna be some turbulence.
I hope you like a challenge.
Love a challenge, Captain.
All right, then.
Black alert.
[alert sounding]
Captioning sponsored by
CBS
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.org